JUDY WOODRUFF: And now: more of my interview
with former President Bill Clinton and writer
James Patterson: about their political thriller,
"The President Is Missing."
I sat down with them yesterday.
President Bill Clinton, James Patterson. The
book is...
JAMES PATTERSON, Co-Author, "The President
Is Missing": Guilty as charged.
(LAUGHTER)
JUDY WOODRUFF: The book is "The President
Is Missing."
A former president of the United States, a
fabulously successful writer, who calls the
shots when you're working together on a book?
BILL CLINTON, Former President of the United
States: Well, I think we know who's better
at this. He's one of the world's great storytellers.
But we both wanted to do it, and our lawyer/agent/friend
Bob Barnett suggested we do it. And when he
mentioned it to you, he said, I have been
trying to get you to write a thriller for
years, and you are never going to do it. You're
too busy with your foundation. So, why don't
you do one with James Patterson?
I said, he'd never do that. Never.
So Bob talked to him. He said yes. And we
just started.
And I told him he was going to have to do
a little hand-holding in the beginning, because
I didn't -- I have read thousands of thrillers,
but I -- I guess, by now, but I didn't know
how to do it.
But we started with an outline. And he said,
OK, here's 20 questions you have got to answer
of how to make this authentic.
JAMES PATTERSON: I didn't tell him there would
be another 20 after that.
(LAUGHTER)
BILL CLINTON: And so we started working. And
then, every draft, we traded back and forth,
sometimes several times.
JAMES PATTERSON: Yes, when Bob came to me
-- we both grew up in small towns, but, in
my small town, nobody ever came.
But when I was 8 or 9 years old, Eisenhower
President Eisenhower, and I never forgot that.
I never forgot that. And I also tried to never
forget where I came from. I never get a big
head because of whatever. I don't think anybody
should get big heads about anything, but I
really tried not to do that.
So, when I got the opportunity to write a
book with President Clinton, I jumped at it,
and to spend a year with him, which has been
fabulous.
JUDY WOODRUFF: This is a book about a president.
It starts out, he's facing an impeachment
hearing, something you know about, President
Clinton.
He's also confronting an international terrorist
threat that, implausibly, he decides to deal
with himself. He has to...
JAMES PATTERSON: Not implausible in terms
of the book, though, in terms of the story,
in terms of why he decides to do that.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Well...
JAMES PATTERSON: But, yes, implausible in
terms of like -- I mean, even when we talked
about it, the president said, this would be
irresponsible, except under this kind of circumstance.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Well, that's what I want to
ask you about, because he has to ditch the
Secret Service, President Clinton, in order
to do -- to go and do this thing on his own.
That would never happen, would it?
BILL CLINTON: Well, it never has happened.
In the book, we explain what the law appears
to be, which is that anybody except the president
who is covered by the Secret Service, including
members of the president's family, can sign
off the coverage and assume the risk, normally,
for a very specific purpose and limited time.
If you read this book, you will see there's
a very specific reason he thinks he has to
do it. And he acknowledges that it won't be
very long, but this is a cyber-security novel,
so the things happen fast, clock is ticking.
He has to make a decision. And he thinks he's
doing the right thing.
But, in general, you wouldn't -- you wouldn't
do it. And you see why shouldn't do it, with
the consequences that flow.
JAMES PATTERSON: There is an incredibly devastating
attack launched toward the United States.
If something like that happened, this is how
it would happen. There's an attack on a presidential
motorcade. If it happened, it would happen
like this. The president goes missing. If
that -- inconceivable as that might normally
be, if it happened, this is how it could happen.
JUDY WOODRUFF: The theme of the book is around,
as you said, a cyber-attack, a cyber-threat.
Is it fair to say, President Clinton, that
you think that that is now the most serious
kind of potential threat this country faces?
BILL CLINTON: Well, of course, a nuclear,
chemical or biological attack could kill more
people more quickly.
But I think it is more likely that a serious
cyber-attack could do a massive amount of
damage and be successful.
JAMES PATTERSON: Currently, you know, we have
a very large defense budget, which is getting
larger, but only a very small part of it is
designated towards cyber-defense.
And I think we both think that we need to
reexamine that in terms of how big that piece
should be.
JUDY WOODRUFF: And this is one way of educating
the public, because...
BILL CLINTON: Yes, we're trying to do something
that you don't normally do. Can you write
a legitimate thriller that's really fun to
read and faithful to the way it would unfold,
and also makes a point that makes people more
interested in the cyber-security thing, because
anything electronic can be hacked.
And that's the point we're trying to make
here.
JAMES PATTERSON: And it's not just that it
goes off temporarily. It can be erased. Or
your bank records, Wall Street, all of it,
it could be erased. That's what really makes
it scary.
And we tried to create a president that we
would remind people how important this job
is, how stressful this job is, so that when
people -- and I'm not being political here,
but when people go out to vote, they would
really think about that a lot, even in the
midterm elections, that, when they go out,
they are going to elect people to Congress.
This is really -- governorships -- this is
really important stuff. This is not -- and
these people are not silly. They're not villains.
They want to do an important job. And let's
be real careful about who we elect.
JUDY WOODRUFF: One of the other points, I
guess you could say moments of education,
comes through in the dysfunction in Washington,
one of the things that is surrounding this
president, this fictional President Duncan.
And, at the end of the book, he laments -- quote
-- and I'm quoting -- "The downward drift
into tribalism, extremism and seething resentment,
us vs. them, a blood sport, the well of trust
runs completely dry."
I guess my question to you is, though, with
President Trump's success, aren't we deal
-- isn't that here to stay for the foreseeable
future?
BILL CLINTON: Well, for a while, it is.
But I think -- you know, I think, in the campaign,
for example, I believe that I attacked him
less personally than anybody else, that I
always said, look, this election is about
you. Here's why you should be for Hillary,
one, two, three.
I think the -- everybody should be trying
to recapture that. For example, I think we
should be rooting for him to succeed with
the Korea negotiations. I don't like having
to brag on the dictatorial proclivities of
the North Korean leader, but I think the South
Korean president has been a genius, the way
he's kind of gotten them together.
And I think anything we can do to reduce that
threat is a positive thing.
JUDY WOODRUFF: We're watching this summit
that looks like it's going to take place between
President Trump and the North Korean leader.
Do you believe the North Koreans -- you have
dealt with them -- are prepared to completely
dismantle their nuclear weapons program?
BILL CLINTON: Maybe, maybe not. But even if
they're not, if they are prepared to have
an inspection regime which would give us greater
confidence that the nuclear material, the
fissile material, and any technology would
be identified, monitored and couldn't be given
or sold to anyone else, that would be worth
doing.
JUDY WOODRUFF: You have said -- you have continued
to say you believe that NAFTA was the right
thing to do, that the benefits outweigh the
disadvantages.
However, your party just has steadily moved
in the direction of protectionism. So, my
question is, that's the political reality,
isn't it, on trade?
BILL CLINTON: Yes.
People will tend to resent any force that
is not helping them. So who cares if trade
is helping somebody else? Who cares if technology
is helping somebody else? I get that.
I do think NAFTA needs to be upgraded. It's
25 years. There's all the other technological
and other changes. I think there is plenty
of room for them to -- for both sides to say
they have got something done, and they can
redo this.
We pretty well know what's going to be hurt
in the trade agreement, who will be helped,
who will be hurt. We should get our money
on the front end from now on. But, otherwise,
I still believe in trade.
JUDY WOODRUFF: You going to do another collaboration
after this one? You going to write a second
Patterson-Clinton book?
JAMES PATTERSON: Well, we have had a lot of
fun doing it. We really -- it's been a tremendous
experience for both of us. It's been fun out
here and doing interviews and big crowds and
really positive crowds.
BILL CLINTON: I was thrilled, at my age, to
try something new.
JAMES PATTERSON: He's probably got a detective
series started already on the side.
BILL CLINTON: Spending 35 years reading all
these mysteries, all of a sudden, I got to
help write one. It was fabulous.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Well, gentlemen, the book is,
"The President Is Missing."
Thank you very much for talking with me, James
Patterson, President Bill Clinton.
JAMES PATTERSON: Thank you. Thank you.
BILL CLINTON: Thank you.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Thank you both.
And you can watch the first part of my interview,
including President Clinton's comments about
Monica Lewinsky. That's on our Web site, PBS.org/NewsHour.